# The Golden 0.4.0E

- [The Golden 0.4.0E](#the-golden-040e)
	- [General syntax](#general-syntax)
	- [Memory layout](#memory-layout)
	- [Basic commands](#basic-commands)
		- [Arithmetic](#arithmetic)
		- [Repetition](#repetition)
	- [Using other memory rows](#using-other-memory-rows)
	- [Other loop commands](#other-loop-commands)
	- [Calling functions](#calling-functions)
	- [Other commands](#other-commands)

## General syntax

Any letter or whitespace is a comment.

```tg
this is a comment
```

Comments can be also marked by surrounding them with `"`

```tg
"this is a comment, which contains other characters as well, like comma, semicolon: ;, colon: :, dot..."
```

Functions are defined by a pair of equal natural numbers (including zero).

```tg
0
	this is function "0"
0
4
	this is function "4"
4
5
	this is a part function "5"
42
	"this is code common for functions 5 and 42"
5
	"this is a part function 42"
42
```

If the code contains function 79 (proton number of gold), then it's called on program startup.

You can specify flags in the code by using `#flag#` or `#flag<newline>`, like this:
```
#someFlag
#someFlagWithParam paramValue#
#someFlag#4
	function "4"
4
```

TG 0.4.0E supports only two flags:

 - `#version <version>`, which specifies the language version. When using TG 0.4.0E, it should be `#version 0.4.0E`.
 - `#impl <arguments>`, which can be anything implementation defined, for example some debugging utility like printing memory

(This compiler has `#impl print mem` for printing local memory, `#impl print global` for printing global memory, `#impl print all mem` for printing all program memory and `#impl print on`/`#impl print off`. These switch on/off something like the official interpreter's debug mode).

## Memory layout

In TG, the memory is made of vectors of doubles. They are named _memory rows_ and their items _cells_. Each memory row has it's own pointer, and you can read from or write to the cell the pointer points to. The pointer starts at cell 0. If we do instructions like this:

```
move pointer 3 to right
set 4
move pointer 2 to left
set 5
move pointer 1 to right
get "returns 4"

state is
0 0 5 4
      ^
```

Memory rows are avaliable in pairs, named _memory_. Each memory has one active and one inactive row. The only exception from the zero-initialization is the cell 0 of the inactive row in _each_ memory, which is set to 1 (for brainf*** compatibility, which 0.4.0E breaks again, but it still keeps it closer).

If you try to read or write to cell to the left of cell 0, the behavior is undefined and likely to break the whole program.

## Basic commands

TG command | description | brainf\*\*\* equivalent
--- | --- | ---
`!` | adds `1` to the value in the active row | `+`
`~` | substracts `1` from the value in the active row | `-`
`<` | shifts the pointer of the active row by 1 to the left | `<`
`>` | shifts the pointer of the active row by 1 to the right | `>`
`.` | prints the character with the id of floor of the value in the active row | `.`
`,` | sets the value in the actove row to id of the character | `,`
`[]` | makes a while loop (of the code inside the brackets) with condition `value in the active row != 0` | `[]`

Character ID should be compatible with ASCII, but since the IO is done through C's standard library and as far as I know C doesn't guarantee chars to be ASCII compatible, it's not guaranteed here as well. You can count on it being ASCII in your programs, since ASCII is generaly used.

### Arithmetic

Let's call the value in active row A and the value in inactive row B.

TG command | description
--- | ---
`+` | set A to A + B
`-` | set A to A - B
`*` | set A to A * B
`/` | set A to A / B
`_` | set A to floor(A)
`&` | set A to ceil(A)

The behavior of division by zero is undefined.

### Repetition

You can repeat some commands by putting `|<count>|` before them. If you leave out the count, it is instead repeated\* `value in active row` times (that is repetition by value). You can even repeat a repetition, but you can't repeat by value a repetition by value. Here's list of repeatable commands:

command | can be repeated by value | effect when repeated by value (value=V, B=value in inactive row)
--- | --- | ---
`!` | yes | add V
`~` | yes | substract V
`<` | yes | move floor(V) to the left
`>` | yes | move floort(V) to the right
`.` | yes | print V characters
`+` | yes | add B*(V+1)
`-` | yes | substract B*(V+1)
`*` | yes | multiply by pow(B, round_in_direction_of_zero(V))
`/` | yes | divide by pow(B, round_in_direction_of_zero(V))
`$.` (not introduced here so far) | yes | print the number V times
`?=` (not introduced here so far) | no | -
`?>` (not introduced here so far) | no | -
`?<` (not introduced here so far) | no | -

## Using other memory rows

You can swap the active and inactive memory row using `^`.

The default memory you use is local memory - the functions you call from your functions can't access it. There is also a second memory - a global memory, an you can switch to controlling the global memory using `'`. To transfer data, you can swap the values in active rows in local and global memory using `;`.

## Other loop commands

There is a do-while loop as well, which always runs at least once: `[@ inner code @]`. There are also conditional breaks: `?=`, `?<` and `?>`. `?=` jumps to end of the current loop _if_ the values in active and inactive rows are equal (warning: it uses double comparissons), `?<` jumps when the value in active row is lower than the value in active row and `?>` jumps when it's greater. If you repeat those commands, you can jump out of N loops. If the amount of repetitions is equal to the current number of loops + 1 (or if you use the commands outside of a loop), it returns from the function instead of jumping.

A nice feature of TG is that you can cross while and do-while loops:

```tg
A is in active row
I is in inactive row
[
	?<
[@
	here I is smaller or equal to A
	?<?>?= jump to the end of the loop unconditionally
]
	here A is lower than I
@]
```

## Calling functions

You can use the `(` command to create a new memory, which now shadows the global one. You can use the memory as you wish, and `)` deletes it. You can have multiple of theese "shadow memories", for example by `(())`. If you use a number anywhere inside a place, where a shadow memory exists, then the function is called with the shadow memory as it's local memory, and the true global memory as the global memory. Any number in parentheses can't mark function definition, so all parentheses must be closed. There also may be an implementation defined count of maximum amount of memories that can exist at any time. (This compiler's limit is 1024.)

## Other commands

command | effect
--- | ---
`\`` | sets the value in active row to random number from 0 to 1 (inclusive)
`??` | sets the value in active row to current cell id of the active row
`$,` | read a number from standard input to current cell in active row
`$.` | print value in active row to standard output
